# Üstte adı geçmeyen Plazma Hastalığı

Plazmanın tanıtılmasının ardından hızla ortaya çıkan birkaç özelliği bulunuyor: mor renkte, oldukça yanıcı ve (oda sıcaklığında bir çubuğu kullanan herkesin onaylayacağı gibi) çok kötü adlandırılmış.

Birkaç yıl araştırma ve çalışma sonucunda ortaya çıkarılan plazmanın diğer ilginç ve yararlı özellikleri de var: muazzam termodinamik özellikleri, alaşımlara karıştırıldığında inanılmaz gerilme dayanımı ve tüketildiğinde organik yaşam formları üzerinde anında toksik etkileri en dikkat çekici olanlarından bazıları. Bu özellikler çeşitli uygulamalarda son derece faydalı olmuş ve daha da önemlisi, sömürüsü son derece karlı hale gelmiştir; plazma madenciliği ve araştırması, Nanotrasen'in tüm tarihindeki en büyük finansal kazançlardan ikincisi haline gelmiştir.

Yıllar süren araştırma ve madencilik faaliyetleri sonucunda ortaya çıkan bilgilerin hepsi iyi yönde olmamıştır. Aslında, Nanotrasen'in herhangi bir yerde yürütülen en yüksek derecede sınıflandırılmış ve gizli araştırmalarından bazıları, plazmanın humanoidler üzerindeki uzun vadeli etkilerine odaklanmaktadır. Plazmayı büyük miktarlarda tüketmenin kısa vadeli etkileri açıktır; kurbanın vücudu boyunca yaygın hücre ölümüne neden olan bir nörotoksin olarak hareket eder. Neyse ki, bu etkiler basit bir oksijen maskesi ile önlenir, ve birinin ölmesine neden olacak kadar havalanıp havalanmadığını anlamak için bir cerrah olmaya gerek yoktur. Ancak sonsuz derecede gizli olan uzun vadeli etkilerdir. Araştırmacıların bu etkiler hakkındaki anlayışları sürekli olarak daha fazla araştırma yapıldıkça değişmektedir, ancak etkilenen bireylerin yavaş nörolojik çöküş, azalan dikkat süresi, şiddetli ruh hali değişiklikleri ve en dikkat çekici olarak, diğer insanlara karşı duygu empati yeteneğinin bozulması gibi belirgin etkileri ortaya çıkmaktadır.

Genellikle bu bulgular ilk duyulduğunda gülünç ve bir şaka gibi görülür. Mantıklıdır: Spinward Periferi, karanlık ve antisosyal davranışlar için mükemmel bir fırtına gibidir ve NT'nin işe alım standartlarına gösterdiği gevşek yaklaşım da durumu pek değiştirmez. Ortalama bir NT mürettebatının maruz kaldığı aldatmaca ve hilekarlıkla, hatta zaman zaman açıkça kanlı olaylarla, bazıları için herhangi bir ahlaki kodun "öldür ya da öl" ötesinde hayatta kalabilmesi daha şaşırtıcı olabilir. Ancak bir şey kesindir ki, ilk birkaç dalgadaki çalışanlar dayanıklı ve kaynaklı oldular, kendilerini buldukları kaos ortamında kişisel normalite ve dürüstlüğü korumak için mücadele ettiler.

## Araştırma ve Keşif

> *"Son grup deneklerin taramaları şaşırtıcı. İşte, buna bir bakın - sanki çürüme duyguları düzenleyen beyin bölgelerine doğrudan hedef alıyor gibi. Bunlar tehlikeli insanlar, onlarla uğraşırken bunu unutmayın."* 
> --Bilinmeyen bir deneyimli araştırmacı, kendi beyin taramasını bilmeden incelediği sırada.
 
For the many faults that can be levied against NT's management of the Spinward Periphery, its command structure and management selection are remarkably egalitarian. The execs and officers of the first waves of personnel sent to the Spinward Periphery were more than willing to lead from the front and become personally involved in dangerous work when needed, and when it came time to select their successors, they chose from the crewmembers they led in the field. Under intense pressure to deliver from both the corporate offices back home and their colleagues on the Periphery, plus extremely high personnel turnover, traditional barriers to advancement such as ethnicity, gender, and even species took a back seat to credentials and experience in the field. Indeed, while non-humans are still barred from serving as station-side Heads of Staff, as well as being excluded from basic protections in the standard silicon lawsets, every species of humanoid is currently represented in the staff of the higher Spinward Central Command. This isn't to say that things are perfectly egalitarian- discrimination still occurs, and there's still a strict chain of command- but the CentCom staff are generally sympathetic to the crewmembers they administrate and remember their own time in the field when balancing risks.

So when signs of this systemic mental and empathetic decay started cropping up among the CentCom staff, they began to take the reports seriously. As research has since revealed, plasma is much harder to fully purge from an area than previously thought, meaning trace amounts of plasma are often circulated through the stale recycled air onboard the stations unbeknownst to the crew. While this trace exposure isn't enough to cause the outright poisoning medical staff are trained to spot and treat, it is enough to cause decay over long periods of time. Only now, after almost two decades of NT's presence on the Spinward Periphery and several generations of workers and leaders passing through its stations, has the scope of the issue started to become clear.

## Looking Forward

The intensity of the decay seems to roughly correlate with a crewmember's length of service and time spent in contaminated areas, but some crewmembers seem more susceptible to the decay than others. Preliminary models estimate that anywhere from 10-35% of crewmembers serving more than one month show minor signs of decay, with estimates reaching as high as 80% after one year, but the truth is that no one is sure how widespread it is. The Spinward Periphery truly is hard on people, and the constant stress and trauma thrown at workers combined with the already rough workforce makes it extremely difficult to identify who is suffering from these effects and to what degree.

In the meantime, ongoing research on plasma's long term effects is strictly classified to the highest degree, and NT has not publicly acknowledged the phenomenon. NT's leadership is at a very uneasy crossroads, both highly concerned with the systematic damages their work is causing among the workforce and themselves, but ultimately unwilling to slow down plasma processing until more concrete evidence comes out. Most of the cases appear to be mild so far, and while the decay seems to be resistant to most chemical forms of treatment such as mannitol and neurine, simple cognitive mindfulness exercises have proven useful in offsetting the effects. By being aware of the changes to their mind, patients can still function among more polite society back in Sol, though increased emotional distance and stress when trying to return to their previous lives is very common among ex-crewmembers.


## Roleplaying Notes

- The effects of the decay are left vague and vary from person to person, perfect for you to fill in how it affects your character as you please. Suffering from decay doesn't have to mean your character loses all self control, perhaps it just causes them to lose perspective sometimes and act very callously in certain situations. Later, when they reflect on what happened or are talking about it with someone else, it may dawn on them how disturbing their actions on a given shift were, and they may take steps to try to control themselves in the future. Maybe it'll work, maybe it won't.
- The ongoing research into the decay is highly classified and hidden from the crew, but perhaps your character has a background in neuroscience or psychiatry, and is involved in the research. Or maybe they have a friend who is involved, or they found concerning research reports on the subject on a superior's desk. There are many ways that your character may have some hazy idea of plasma's long term effects, and thus become aware of the hazards that could come with staying. What is it that keeps them here?
- The described effects of the decay purposely overlap with those of several personality disorders and potential results of extreme trauma. Has your character become a bastard because plasma is warping their brain? Is it a coping mechanism to help them survive the insane amounts of senseless violence and constant stress they've been exposed to? Or have they always been like that inside, and SS13's "survive at all costs" mindset has just given them an excuse to really lean into it? There's no reason it can't be a little of each, and everyone has been a bastard to someone at some point.
